Mohamed/1.58 llm new era of extreme quantization (#2339)
huggingface/blog: 1_58_llm_extreme_quantization.md

  $$

  We first scale the weights by \( scale_w \approx 1.2 \):

  $$
  W \times scale_w = 
  \begin{bmatrix}
  0.8 \times 1.2 & -0.5 \times 1.2 & 1.2 \times 1.2 \\
  -1.5 \times 1.2 & 0.4 \times 1.2 & -0.9 \times 1.2 \\
  1.3 \times 1.2 & -0.7 \times 1.2 & 0.2 \times 1.2
  \end{bmatrix}
  =
  \begin{bmatrix}
  0.96 & -0.6 & 1.44 \\
  -1.8 & 0.48 & -1.08 \\
  1.56 & -0.84 & 0.24
  \end{bmatrix}
  $$

  Next, we round the values and clamp them to the range \([-1, 1]\):

  $$
  W_q = 
  \begin{bmatrix}
  1 & -1 & 1 \\
  -1 & 0 & -1 \\
  1 & -1 & 0
  \end{bmatrix}
  $$

  **Step 3: Dequantize the Weights**  
  Finally, we dequantize the weights using:

  $$
  W_{dequantized} = W_q \times scale_w
  $$

  Substituting scale_w, we get:

  $$
  W_{dequantized} = 
  \begin{bmatrix}
  1 \times 1.2 & -1 \times 1.2 & 1 \times 1.2 \\
  -1 \times 1.2 & 0 \times 1.2 & -1 \times 1.2 \\
  1 \times 1.2 & -1 \times 1.2 & 0 \times 1.2
  \end{bmatrix}
  =
  \begin{bmatrix}
  1.2 & -1.2 & 1.2 \\
  -1.2 & 0 & -1.2 \\
  1.2 & -1.2 & 0
  \end{bmatrix}
  $$

</details>

<details>
  <summary>Example 2: Activation Matrix Quantization</summary>

  Let the activation matrix \( X \) be:

>   $$

Author: With the new syntax, equations aren't rendered correclty on vscode, is this normal ?

>   $$

Reviewer: I think so, the rendering engine for the blog uses a special format for latex.

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/finetuning_basic.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 80%;"/>
  <figcaption>Finetuning plot compared to pretraining plot</figcaption>
</figure>

To understand why, we tried to inspect both the weight distributions of the randomly initialized model and the pre-trained model to identify potential issues.

<div style="display: flex; justify-content: center;">
  <figure style="margin-right: 20px; text-align: center;">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/poids_aléatoires.png" alt="Image 1" style="width: 400px;" />
    <figcaption>Random weights distribution (2 merged stds)</figcaption>
  </figure>
  <figure style="text-align: center;">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/poids_llama3.png" alt="Image 2" style="width: 400px;" />
    <figcaption>Pre-trained Llama3 weights distribution</figcaption>
  </figure>

> </div>

Reviewer: Small nit: also use the caption in the `alt` text.

Reviewer: The axes and the titles are hard to read. In addition, would it help to use the same scales, or show them together?

And the scale values for the two distributions are, respectively : 

<div style="display: flex; justify-content: center;">
  <figure style="margin-right: 20px; text-align: center;">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/scales_random.png" alt="Image 1" style="width: 400px;" />
    <figcaption>Random weights scales distribution</figcaption>
  </figure>
  <figure style="text-align: center;">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/scales_llama3.png" alt="Image 2" style="width: 400px;" />
    <figcaption>Pre-trained Llama3 weights distribution</figcaption>
  </figure>

> </div>

Reviewer: Same: would it help to use the same scales?

The initial random weight distribution is a mix of two normal distributions:

- One with a standard deviation (std) of $0.025$

> - Another with a std of $ \frac{0.025}{\sqrt{2 \cdot \text{num\_hidden\_layers}}} = 0.00325 $

Reviewer: Is this a standard result from weights initialization, or nanotron specific?

Author: It's nanotron specific, but based on a paper

This results from using different stds for column linear and row linear weights in `nanotron`. In the quantized version, all matrices have only 2 weight scales (50.25 and 402), which are the inverse of the mean absolute value of the weights for each matrix: `scale = 1.0 / w.abs().mean().clamp_(min=1e-5)`

> - For $\text{scale} = 50.25$, $w.abs().mean() = 0.0199$, leading to $\text{std} = 0.025$ which matches our first standard deviation. The formula used to derive the std is based on the expectation of the half-normal distribution of $ |w| $:  

Reviewer: Latex fixes required here as well.

  $$ \mathbb{E}(|w|) = \text{std}(w) \cdot \sqrt{\frac{2}{\pi}} $$
- For $\text{scale} = 402$, $w.abs().mean() = 0.0025$, leading to $\text{std} = 0.00325$

On the other hand, the pretrained weight's distribution looks like a normal distribution with an $\text{std} = 0.013$

Clearly, the pretrained model starts with more information (scales), while the randomly initialized model starts with practically no information and adds to it over time. Our conclusion was that starting with random weights gives the model minimal initial information, enabling a gradual learning process, while during finetuning, the introduction of BitLinear layers overwhelms the model into losing all its prior information.

> To improve the results of the finetuning, we tried different techniques, like instead of using per tensor quantization, we tried per row and per column quantization to keep more information from the weights of Llama3. We also tried to change the way how the scale is computed, by instead of just taking the mean absolute value of the weights as a scale, we take the mean absolute value of the outliers as a scale (an outlier value is a value that exceeds k*mean_absolute_value where k is a constant we tried to vary in our experiments), but we didn’t notice any big improvement. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To improve the fine-tuning results, we tried different techniques. For example, instead of using per-tensor quantization, we tried per-row and per-column quantization to keep more information from the Llama 3 weights. We also tried to change the way the scale is computed: instead of just taking the mean absolute value of the weights as a scale, we take the mean absolute value of the outliers as a scale (an outlier value is a value that exceeds k*mean_absolute_value, where k is a constant we tried to vary in our experiments), but we didn’t notice big improvements.
```

```python
def scale_outliers(tensor, threshold_factor=1):
    mean_absolute_value = torch.mean(torch.abs(tensor))
    threshold = threshold_factor * mean_absolute_value
    outliers = tensor[torch.abs(tensor) > threshold]
    mean_outlier_value = torch.mean(torch.abs(outliers))
    return mean_outlier_value

def weight_quant_scaling(w):
    scale = 1.0 / scale_outliers(w).clamp_(min=1e-5)
    quantized_weights = (w * scale).round().clamp_(-1, 1) / scale
    return quantized_weights
```

> We observed that both the random weights and Llama3 weights resulted in losses starting at approximately the same value of 13. This suggests that the Llama3 model loses all of its prior information when quantization is introduced. To further investigate how much information the model loses during this process, we experimented with per-group quantization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We observed that both the random weights and the Llama 3 weights resulted in losses starting at approximately the same value of 13. This suggests that the Llama 3 model loses all of its prior information when quantization is introduced. To further investigate how much information the model loses during this process, we experimented with per-group quantization.
```

> As a sanity check, we first set the group size to 1, which essentially means no quantization. In this scenario, the loss started at 1.45, as expected. However, when we increased the group size to 2, the loss jumped to around 11. This indicates that even with a minimal group size of 2, the model still loses nearly all of its information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a sanity check, we first set the group size to 1, which essentially means no quantization. In this scenario, the loss started at 1.45, same as we see during normal fine-tuning. However, when we increased the group size to 2, the loss jumped to around 11. This indicates that even with a minimal group size of 2, the model still loses nearly all of its information.
```

To address this issue, we considered the possibility of introducing quantization gradually rather than applying it abruptly to the weights and activations for each tensor. To achieve this, we implemented a lambda value to control the process : 

```python
lambda_ = ?
x_quant = x + lambda_ * (activation_quant(x) - x).detach()
w_quant = w + lambda_ * (weight_quant(w) - w).detach()
```

When `lambda` is set to 0, there is essentially no quantization occurring, while at `lambda=1`, full quantization is applied.

> We initially tested some discrete `lambda` values, such as 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1. However, this approach did not lead to any significant improvement in results mainly because `lambda=0.25` is already high enough for the loss to start very high.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We initially tested some discrete `lambda` values, such as 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1. However, this approach did not lead to any significant improvement in results, mainly because `lambda=0.25` is already high enough for the loss to start very high.
```

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/lambda_0.25.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 80%;"/>
  <figcaption>Finetuning plot with lambda = 0.25->0.5->0.75->1</figcaption>
</figure>

As a result, we decided to experiment with a `lambda` value that adjusts dynamically based on the training step.

```python
lambda_ = training_step / total_training_steps
```

> Using this dynamic `lambda` value led to better loss convergence, but the perplexity (ppl) results during inference, when `lambda` was set to 1, were still far from satisfactory. We realized this was likely because the model hadn't been trained long enough with `lambda`=1. To address this, we adjusted our `lambda` value to improve the training process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using this dynamic `lambda` value led to better loss convergence, but the perplexity (ppl) results during inference, when `lambda` was set to 1, were still far from satisfactory. We realized this was likely because the model hadn't been trained long enough with `lambda=1`. To address this, we adjusted our `lambda` value to improve the training process.
```

```python
lambda_ = min(2 * training_step / total_training_steps, 1)
```

With this configuration, after 2000 steps we have : 

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/lambda_training_step.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 80%;"/>
  <figcaption>Finetuning plot with lambda = min(2*training_step/total_training_steps, 1)</figcaption>

> </figure>

Reviewer: Legend suggestions:
- Pre-training from random weights
- Fine-tuning from Llama 3 (naive)
- Fine-tuning from Llama 3 (progressive lambda)

Our fine-tuning method shows better convergence overall. You can observe a slight increase in the loss curve around 1,000 steps, which corresponds to when we begin approaching `lambda=1`, or full quantization. However, immediately after this point, the loss starts to converge again, leading to an improved perplexity of approximately 4.

> Despite this progress, when we tested the quantized model, which was fine-tuned on the tinystories small dataset, using the WikiText dataset, the model showed a very high perplexity. This suggests that fine-tuning the model in low-bit mode on a specific dataset causes it to lose much of its general knowledge. This issue might arise because the minimal representations we aim for with ternary weights can vary significantly from one dataset to another. To address this problem, we scaled our training process to include the larger [FineWeb-edu](https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceFW/fineweb) dataset. We maintained a `lambda` value of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite this progress, when we tested the quantized model on the WikiText dataset (instead of the tinystories one we used for fine-tuning), it showed a very high perplexity. This suggests that fine-tuning the model in low-bit mode on a specific dataset causes it to lose much of its general knowledge. This issue might arise because the minimal representations we aim for with ternary weights can vary significantly from one dataset to another. To address this problem, we scaled our training process to include the larger [FineWeb-edu](https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceFW/fineweb) dataset. We maintained a `lambda` value of:
```

```python
def sigmoid_scheduler(step, total_steps, k):
    # Sigmoid-like curve: slow start, fast middle, slow end
    normalized_step = step / total_steps
    return 1 / (1 + np.exp(-k * (normalized_step - 0.5)))
```

For different k values we have the following curves : 

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/sig_scheduler.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 60%;"/>
  <figcaption>Sigmoid scheduler for different k values</figcaption>
</figure>

We ran 5 experiments this time with k in [15, 20, 25, 40, 100] : 

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/sig_scheduler_exps.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 80%;"/>
  <figcaption>Finetuning plots with sigmoid scheduler</figcaption>
</figure>

> The sharp increase in lambda caused instability around the 500th step and didn’t fix the first divergence issue. However, for \( k = 100 \), we observed some improvement in downstream tasks (see the results table), although perplexity remained around ~13.5. Despite this, it didn’t show a clear performance boost over a linear scheduler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sharp increase in lambda caused instability around the 500th step and didn’t fix the first divergence issue. However, for \\( k = 100 \\), we observed some improvement in downstream tasks (see the results table), although perplexity remained around ~13.5. Despite this, it didn’t show a clear performance boost over a linear scheduler.
```

Additionally, we experimented with training models from scratch using random weights and various learning rates. This allowed us to compare the effectiveness of our fine-tuning approach against traditional pretraining methods.

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/exp-randoms.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 80%;"/>
  <figcaption>Different Pre-training plots with different learning rates</figcaption>
</figure>

None of the models trained from random weights performed better than our fine-tuned model. The best perplexity we achieved with those models was 26, which falls short compared to the results from our fine-tuning approach.

### Scaling to 100B Tokens !

> We scaled our experiments to 100 billion tokens to see if we could match the performance of Llama3 8B. We conducted longer training runs, starting from our best-performing checkpoint from the shorter runs with the linear scheduler, and continued fine-tuning for 45,000 steps. We experimented with different learning rates, and while the model performed closely to the Llama3 model in some metrics, on average, it still lagged behind.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We scaled our experiments to 100 billion tokens to see if we could match the performance of Llama 3 8B. We conducted longer training runs, starting from our best-performing checkpoint from the shorter runs with the linear scheduler, and continued fine-tuning for 45,000 steps. We experimented with different learning rates, and while the model performed closely to the Llama 3 model in some metrics, on average, it still lagged behind.
```

Here are some examples of the metrics we evaluated at various checkpoints during the training :
<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/metrics_100B.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 80%;"/>
  <figcaption>Metrics evaluations during the training for different lrs</figcaption>
</figure>

and the average score looks like : 

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/metric_avg.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 60%;"/>
  <figcaption>Average evaluation during the training for different lrs</figcaption>
</figure>

### Experiments on Smaller Models

> In our initial experiments with smaller models like Smol LLMs, we observed that the warmup quantization technique didn’t yield as much improvement as it did with larger models. This suggests that the effectiveness of warmup quantization could be more closely related to model size and complexity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our initial experiments with smaller models like SmolLM, we observed that the warmup quantization technique didn’t yield as much improvement as it did with larger models. This suggests that the effectiveness of warmup quantization could be more closely related to model size and complexity.
```

> For example, here are the loss curves for the [Smol LLM 135M](https://huggingface.co/HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM-135M) model, comparing warmup quantization with full quantization from the start. Interestingly, the curves closely align, and the resulting perplexities aren't significantly different.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, here are the loss curves for the [SmolLM 135M](https://huggingface.co/HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM-135M) model, comparing warmup quantization with full quantization from the start. Interestingly, the curves closely align, and the resulting perplexities aren't significantly different.
```

For the 100B tokens experiments, the best performing checkpoint we had is the following : 

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/metrics_100B_table.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 60%;"/>
  <figcaption>Metrics comparison with Llama models for the model trained on 100B tokens</figcaption>
</figure>

To replicate these results, you can check out this [PR](https://github.com/huggingface/nanotron/pull/174) to convert models to nanotron format, unpack the weights (check the function [unpack_weights](https://gist.github.com/MekkCyber/78c1532e8767e8da0588b778faf61866)), and use lighteval

Note that even though the models are fine-tuned from an Instruct-tuned model, they still need to be fine-tuned using an Instruct dataset as well. These can be considered base models.

> ## Kernels & Benchmarks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Custom Kernels & Benchmarks
```

To benefit from the BitNet low-precision weights, we pack them into an `int8` tensor (this makes the number of parameters go from 8B to 2.8B!). During inference, these weights must be unpacked before performing matrix multiplication. We implemented custom kernels in Cuda and Triton to handle the on-the-fly unpacking during the matrix multiplication process. For the matrix multiplication itself, we employed the cached tiled matrix multiplication technique. To fully grasp this approach, let's first review some Cuda programming fundamentals.

> ### **Basic GPU Concepts: Threads, Blocks, and Shared Memory**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Basic GPU Concepts: Threads, Blocks, and Shared Memory
```

No need to bold the section heading imo.

Before diving into cached tiled matrix multiplication, it's important to understand some basic GPU concepts:

- **Threads and Blocks**: GPUs execute thousands of threads simultaneously. These threads are grouped into blocks, and each block runs independently. The grid is made up of these blocks, and it represents the entire problem space. For example, in matrix multiplication, each thread might be responsible for computing a single element of the output matrix.
- **Shared Memory**: Each block has access to a limited amount of shared memory, which is much faster than global memory (the main memory on the GPU). However, shared memory is limited in size and shared among all threads within a block. Using shared memory effectively is key to improving performance in GPU programs.

> ### **Challenges in Matrix Multiplication**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Challenges in Matrix Multiplication
```

- **Memory Bandwidth**: Accessing global memory is relatively slow compared to the speed at which the GPU cores can perform computations. If each thread reads matrix elements directly from global memory, the memory access times can become a bottleneck.
- **Redundant Data Access**: In matrix multiplication, many elements of the input matrices are used multiple times. If each thread fetches the required data from global memory independently, the same data might be loaded into the GPU multiple times, leading to inefficiency. For example, if each thread is used to compute a single element in the output matrix, the thread responsible for calculating the element at position (i, j) will need to load the i-th row of matrix A and the j-th column of matrix B from global memory. However, other threads, such as the one computing the element at position (i+1, j), cannot reuse this data and will have to reload the same j-th column from global memory again.

> ### **The Idea of Tiling**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### The Idea of Tiling
```

```python
# Adapted from https://github.com/microsoft/unilm/blob/master/bitnet/The-Era-of-1-bit-LLMs__Training_Tips_Code_FAQ.pdf
import torch
import torch.nn as nn 
import torch.nn.functional as F

def activation_quant_inference(x):
    x = LN(x)
    scale = 127.0 / x.abs().max(dim=-1, keepdim=True).values.clamp_(min=1e-5)
    y = (x * scale).round().clamp_(-128, 127)
    return y, scale
 
class BitLinear(nn.Linear):
    """
    Only for training
    """
    def forward(self, x):
        w = self.weight # weights here are already quantized to (-1, 0, 1)    
        w_scale = self.w_scale  
        x_quant, x_scale = activation_quant_inference(x)
        y = efficient_kernel(x_quant, w) / w_scale / x_scale
        return y
```

## Results In the Paper

### Computational Efficiency :

For BitNet, the energy consumption during matrix multiplication is primarily influenced by the addition operations, given that the weights are ternary. The multiplication operations are limited to scaling the output with the weights scale and activations scale, which provides enormous energy and computation savings.

### Downstream Tasks

> BitNet is effective in delivering strong performance compared to baseline methods, especially at lower bit levels. According to the paper, BitNet achieves scores that are on par with 8-bit models but with significantly lower inference costs. In the case of 4-bit models, methods that only quantize weights outperform those that quantize both weights and activations, as activations are harder to quantify. However, BitNet, which uses 1.58-bit weights, surpasses both weight-only and weight-and-activation quantization methods.

Reviewer 2: We are not really discussion the results in the paper. I would just talk about the computational efficiency part in the section where you talk/code the kernel. 
Same for the downstream tasks, we can use that as an introduction when you share the results you got.

We tried to reproduce the results of the BitNet paper; we started with a small dataset, [tinystories](https://huggingface.co/datasets/roneneldan/TinyStories), and a Llama3 8B model architecture. It seemed that adding a normalization function like in the paper improves the performance. For example, after 2000 steps of training, we had a perplexity on the validation part of the dataset equal to 6.3 without normalization, and 5.9 with normalization, but in both cases, the training was stable.

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/pretraining.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 80%;"/>
  <figcaption>Pretraining plots without (blue) & with (green) layer normalisation </figcaption>
</figure>

While this approach looks very interesting for pretraining, only a few institutions can afford pretraining models at the necessary scale. However, there is already a wide range of strong pretrained models, and it would be extremely useful if they could be converted to 1.58bit after pretraining. Thus we set out on an investigation to see if we can make 1.58 fine-tuning work. 

> ## Finetuning in 1.58bit

Reviewer: Also, we should be consistent in the use of `finetuning` vs `fine-tuning` (I think the latter is used most times in the post, but not always).

</figure>

The sharp increase in lambda caused instability around the 500th step and didn’t fix the first divergence issue. However, for \( k = 100 \), we observed some improvement in downstream tasks (see the results table), although perplexity remained around ~13.5. Despite this, it didn’t show a clear performance boost over a linear scheduler.

Additionally, we experimented with training models from scratch using random weights and various learning rates. This allowed us to compare the effectiveness of our fine-tuning approach against traditional pretraining methods.

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/exp-randoms.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 80%;"/>
  <figcaption>Different Pre-training plots with different learning rates</figcaption>
</figure>

None of the models trained from random weights performed better than our fine-tuned model. The best perplexity we achieved with those models was 26, which falls short compared to the results from our fine-tuning approach.

### Scaling to 100B !

> We scaled our experiments to 100 billion tokens to see if we could match the performance of Llama3 8B. We conducted longer training runs, starting from our best-performing checkpoint from the shorter runs with the linear scheduler, and continued fine-tuning for 45,000 steps. We experimented with different learning rates, and while the model performed closely to the Llama3 model in some metrics, on average, it still lagged behind.

Reviewer 2: Which model are we fine-tuning (exact name and size) ?

  <figcaption>Average evaluation during the training for different lrs</figcaption>
</figure>

### Experiments on Smaller Models

In our initial experiments with smaller models like Smol LLMs, we observed that the warmup quantization technique didn’t yield as much improvement as it did with larger models. This suggests that the effectiveness of warmup quantization could be more closely related to model size and complexity.

For example, here are the loss curves for the [Smol LLM 135M](https://huggingface.co/HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM-135M) model, comparing warmup quantization with full quantization from the start. Interestingly, the curves closely align, and the resulting perplexities aren't significantly different.

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/smol_llm_exp.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 60%;"/>
  <figcaption>Smoll LLm finetuning experiment with & without warmup quantization</figcaption>
</figure>

### Experiments On a 70B Model

> Noticing that the metrics in our 100 billion token run started to stagnate, we realized that trying to match the performance of a Llama3 8B model using ternary weights might be unrealistic, especially given the reduced compute available for fine-tuning. Instead, we decided to apply our method to fine-tune the [Llama3.1 70B](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3.1-70B) model and compare its performance on benchmarks against the Llama3 8B model.

Reviewer 2: I would add the graph from the original paper to better explain why we decided to compare to 7B models: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.17764 . There are also other nice graphs that can be reused (energy consumption graph) for this blogpost.

  <figcaption>Metrics comparison with Llama models : L means Linear lambda scheduler, and S means Sigmoid lambda scheduler (in our case k = 100)</figcaption>
</figure>

After fine-tuning on just 10 billion tokens using ternary weights, the model demonstrates impressive performance, especially when compared to other models that underwent much more extensive training. For instance, it outperforms the Bitnet 7B model, which was trained on a significantly larger dataset of 100 billion tokens. Additionally, it performs better than the FBI LLM (Fully Binarized LLM), a model that was distilled on an even more massive 1.26 trillion tokens. This highlights the model's efficiency and effectiveness despite the relatively smaller scale of its fine-tuning process.

For the 100B tokens experiments, the best performing checkpoint we had is the following : 

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/metrics_100B_table.png" alt="Alt Text" style="width: 60%;"/>
  <figcaption>Metrics comparison with Llama models for the model trained on 100B tokens</figcaption>

> </figure>

Reviewer 2: Instead of our model, we can maybe give a better description ? Also the (100B) or (10B) can be a bit confusing. Maybe add a token columns.

For the 70B model

> 

Reviewer 2: ?

## Integration in Transformers & How To Use

To integrate the BitNet architecture into Transformers, we introduced a new quantization method called "bitnet." This method involves replacing the standard Linear layers with specialized BitLinear layers that are compatible with the BitNet architecture, with appropriate activation dynamic quantization, weight unpacking, and matrix multiplication. 

Loading and testing the model in Transformers is incredibly straightforward! Here's how you can do it:

```python
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("", device_map="cuda", torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16)    
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct")

input_text = ""
input_ids = tokenizer.encode(input_text, return_tensors="pt").cuda()
output = model_.generate(input_ids, max_length=100, do_sample=False)
generated_text = tokenizer.decode(output[0], skip_special_tokens=True)
print(generated_text)
```

With this code, everything is managed seamlessly behind the scenes, so there's no need to worry about additional complexities. 

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe let's put this section a bit earlier (after what's bitnet) ?

  <figcaption>Triton kernel compared to torch.compile</figcaption>
</figure>

We also tried using BitBlas, which is a software library designed to perform matrix operations with mixed precision. It helps optimize these operations by allowing calculations to be done in lower precision formats like INT8, INT4, or even INT2, instead of the traditional FP32 or FP16 formats. 

The benchmark results are promising, as BitBlas outperforms both our custom kernel and Torch's `matmul` function in low precision, as shown in the graph.

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/1.58llm_extreme_quantization/with_bitblas.png" alt="Bitblas benchmark" style="width: 100%;"/>
  <figcaption>Bitblas benchmark</figcaption>
</figure>

However, during model loading, BitBlas needs to compile kernels tailored to the shape of the weight matrix and store them in a local database, which can increase the initial loading time. 

## Conclusion

> In conclusion, as (LLMs) continue to expand, reducing their computational demands through quantization is essential. This blog has explored the approach of 1.58-bit quantization, which uses ternary weights. While pre-training models in 1.58 bits is resource-intensive, we’ve demonstrated that, with some tricks, it’s possible to fine-tune existing models to this precision level, achieving efficient performance without sacrificing accuracy. By optimizing inference speed through specialized kernels, BitNet opens new possibilities for making LLMs more practical and scalable.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In conclusion, as LLMs continue to expand, reducing their computational demands through quantization is essential. This blog has explored the approach of 1.58-bit quantization, which uses ternary weights. While pre-training models in 1.58 bits is resource-intensive, we’ve demonstrated that, with some tricks, it’s possible to fine-tune existing models to this precision level, achieving efficient performance without sacrificing accuracy. By optimizing inference speed through specialized kernels, BitNet opens new possibilities for making LLMs more practical and scalable.

```
